---
layout: post
title: "Writing a Thesis"
subtitle: "My First Experience"
date: 2025-08-07
published: false
---

In order to fulfil the requirements of a bachelor's degree, students at Maastricht University School of Business and Economics (SBE) must write a thesis. The thesis can either take the form of a research proposal, a literature review, or a small-scale research paper. My interest in economic research led me to sign up for the **MaRBLe** program which allows students to engage in a small-scale research project. While the experience was interesting, I did not fully take advantage of the research opportunity offered by the program. In this article, I discuss the research experience and three potential improvements for future research projects.

## Lesson 1 - Start early

The school allocates a full semester to the writing of the bachelor's thesis and in the MaRBLe program, outside of a few strict deadlines, students are given a sizeable amount of freedom to set their own agenda with their supervisor. I contacted my supervisor in early September and we exchanged a few words a few days later. The first objective was to find a research topic. 

I only had a vague idea of the topic I wanted to explore. I knew that I wanted to write my thesis at the Microeconomics and Public Economics department to research on a topic related to pensions. This area of research appeared relevant as many countries in Europe have adjusted their pension schemes in light of the demographic trends observed in the developed world.

{% epigraph %}
During this step, I slowly came to the realization that while finding a research topic is difficult, formulating it can be even more challenging.
{% endepigraph %}

The main problem was that I was looking for **the** research topic rather than a research topic

## Lesson 2 - Choose your variables wisely

## Lesson 3 - Explore alternative models

## Comments

---
- Thesis focuses on the role of awareness and individual attitudes for preferences regarding distribution towards families

- Survey is developed and competently implemented; results are discussed in detail

- Thesis is generally well-written

- Research question and relations between variables of interest and redistribution preferences should have been formulated more clearly and explained in more detail. Also, it remains somewhat unclear how the literature explained in the review section link to the survey items and the survey design

- Variable descriptions/explanations and descriptive analyses should have been more extensive

- Choice of definitions of indicator variables should have been explained; potential alternatives should have been considered

- Choice of specific regression models should have been motivated; alternative specifications would have been useful (e.g., integration of all attitudes into one model)
---